Let's look at how we can use summary
statistics to explore data in more detail.
After this video you will be able to
define what a summary statistic is,
list three common summary statistics and
explain how summary statistics
are useful in exploring data.
Summary statistics are quantities
that describe a set of data values.
Summary statistics provide a simple and
quick way to summarize a dataset.
We will discuss three main
categories of summary statistics.
Measures of location or centrality,
measures of spread, and measures of shape.
Measures of location are summary
statistics that describe the central or
typical value in your dataset.
These statistics give a sense of
the middle or center of the dataset.
Examples of these are mean,
median and mode.
The mean is just the average
of the values in a dataset.
The median is the value in the middle if
you sorted the values in your dataset.
In a sorted list, half of the values
will be less than the median and
half will be greater than the median.
If the number of data values is even,
then the median is the mean
of the two middle values.
The mode is a value that is repeated
more often than any other value.
In this example we have
a dataset with ten values.
For this dataset,
the mean is 51.1 which is the number
of all the values divided by 10.
The median is 46, if you sort these
numbers, the middle numbers are 42 and 50.
The average of these two numbers is 46.
There are two modes for
the this dataset, 42 and 78,
since each occurs twice,
more than any other value in the dataset.
Measures of spread describe how
dispersed or varied your dataset is.
Common measures of spread are minimum,
maximum, range,
standard deviation and variance.
Minimum and
maximum are of course the smallest and
largest values in your
dataset respectively.
The range is simply the difference
between the maximum and minimum and
tells you how spread out your data is.
Standard deviation describes the amount
of variation in your dataset.
A low standard deviation value means
that the samples in your dataset
tend to be close to the mean.
And a high standard deviation value means
that the data samples are spread out.
Variance is closely related
to standard deviation.
In fact the variance is the square
of the standard deviation.
So it also indicates how spread out
the data samples are from the mean.
For the same dataset, the range is 66
which is a difference between the largest
number which is 87 and
the smallest number which is 21.
The variance is 548.767,
you can calculate this using
a calculator or a spreadsheet.
And the standard deviation is 23.426
which is the square root of the variance.
Measures of shape describe the shape
of the distribution of a set of values.
Common members of shape are skewness and
kurtosis.
Skewness indicates whether the data
values are asymmetrically distributed.
A skewness value of around zero
indicates that the data distribution
is approximately normal, as shown in
the middle figure in the top diagram.
A negative skewness value indicates that
the distribution is skewed to the left,
as indicated in the left
figure in the top diagram.
A positive skewness
value on the other hand
indicates that the data distribution
is skewed to the right.
Kurtosis measures the tailedness
of the data distribution or
how heavy or
fat the tails of the distribution are.
A high kurtosis value describes a
distribution with longer and fatter tails
and a higher and sharper central peak,
indicating the presence of outliers.
A low kurtosis value on the other hand,
describes a distribution with shorter and
lighter tails and lower and
broader central peak,
suggesting the lack of outliers.
In our age example, the skewness is about
0.3 indicating a slight positive skew.
And the kurtosis is -1.2 indicating
a distribution with a low and
broad central peak and
shorter and lighter tails.
Measures of dependence determine if any
relationship exists between variables.
Pairwise correlation is a commonly
used measure of dependence.
This is a table that shows pairwise
correlation for a set of variables.
Note that correlation applies
only to numerical variables.
Correlations is between zero and one,
with zero indicating no correlation,
and one indicating a one
to one correlation.
So a correlation of
0.89 is very strong and
this is expected since a person's height
and weight should be very correlated.
The summary statistics we just covered
are useful for numerical variables.
For categorical variables, we want to look
at statistics that describe the number of
categories and
the frequency of each category.
This is done using a contingency table.
Here's an example that shows
a distribution of people's pets and
their colors.
We can see the most common pet is
a dog and least common's a fish.
Similarly, black is the most common
color and orange the least common.
The contingency table also shows
the distribution between the categories.
For example, only fish are orange
while most of the brown pets are dogs.
In addition to looking at
the traditional summary statistics for
numerical variables, and
category count for categorical variables.
For machine learning problems,
we also want to examine some additional
statistics to quickly validate the data.
One of the first things to
check is the number of rows and
the number of columns in your dataset.
Does the number of rows match
the expected number of samples?
Does the number of columns match
the expected number of variables?
These should be very quick and
easy checks.
Another easy data validation check is
to look at the values in the first and
last few samples in your dataset
to see if they're reasonable.
For example, do the temperature values
looks to be in the right units of measure.
Do the values for rainfall look correct or
are there some values
that look out of place?
Are the data types for
your variables correct, for example,
is the date field captured as dates or
timestamp.
Or is it capture as a string or
numerical value?
These will have consequences in how
these fields should be processed.
Another important step is to check for
missing values.
You need to determine the number
of samples with missing values.
You also need to determine
if there are any variables
with a high percentage of missing values.
Handling missing values is a very
important step in data preparation
which we will cover in the next module.
Having this information will be very
helpful in determining how missing values
should be handled in data preparation.
We covered several types of summary
statistics useful for exploring data and
machine learning.
The statistics provide useful information
about your dataset and should be
thoroughly examine if you want to get
a better understanding of your data.